commentsthreedeep.
page 1 comment 1,2:

When writing the paper I was wondering what terminology to use. Should we clearly distinguish between a generalized algebraic theory and its signature? Technically, we have the distinction between the signature Sigma and the inference system T_Sigma. However, I decided to ignore this distinction. But aren't you doing the same? You write in your APAL-paper

"Thus, a generalised algebraic theory consists of (i) a set of sorts, each with a specified role either as a constant type or else as a variable type varying in some way, (ii) a set of operator symbols, each one with its argument types and its value type specified (the value type may vary as the argument varies), (iii) a set of axioms. Each axiom must be an identity between similar well-formed expressions, either between terms of the same possibly varying type or else between type expressions."

which suggests that a gat consists of (what we call) its signature.

comment 3

Thanks for pointing out this inconsistent terminology. You are right that in the abstract we talk about the gats of monoids, categories, etc, whereas in the example section we talk about the gats of internal monoids, internal categories, etc. We discussed which terminology to use. I actually favoured talking about the gat of monoids, rather than the gat of internal monoids. But the others favoured the gat of internal monoids, and I gave in.

page 2

So you disgaree with the statement "In contrast to the various syntactic systems, the gat of cwfs has a canonical flavour". Can you elaborate?

page 3

So you disagree that we "define a new notion of a generalized algebraic theory". I think it is important that what we define is similar enough to your notion to merit using the same name. There are of course some differences (finitely presented, no type equations). However, we emphasize that these are finitely presented and we also comment on the lack of type equations, and I don't think these differences merit changing the name. Then the whole point is of course to have an abstract definition of signatures in terms of uniform families and the theory as an initial model in CwF_Sigma rather than a syntactic definiton. (And now we come back to the question whether "gat" refers to a signature or the intiial model.) The connection with your notion is that I expect that for finitely presented gats without type equations one could organize your gats as initial models in our sense.

The situation is analogous to saying that Martin-Löf type theory can be defined / characterized) as "the" initial cwf with extra structure for the type formers. Is this problematic terminologically?

page 5 comment 1

Here the terminological issue comes up again. Technically, we have Sigma, CwF_Sigma, and T_Sigma. In the paper we use the terminology "signature of a gat", "the category of models of this signature" and "the initial model" respectively. Often we just use "gat" for "signature of a gat" (as you do in your APAL-paper). I couldn't find a place where we use "gat" for the initial model although this would be a possibility.

comment 2

"Nowhere do I see a new notion of gat defined". Definition 4 is both of a signature for a gat and its category of models. What is meant by the "new notion of gat" is the new notion of a signature for a gat.

Then theorem 1 is the construction of the initial object T_Sigma.

comment 3

The idea behind this definition is that it is an inductive definition with four introductory clauses: the empty signature, extending a signature with a new sort symbol, etc. And then we simultaneously define the associated models CwF_Sigma, and these participate in the introduction rules. This is why it has an "inductive-recursive" nature. (It was actually one of the reviewers who explicitly pointed out that this definition is inductive-recursive.)

However, I take your point that you don't find this a readable way of stating the definiton. In fact, we have discussed reformulating this definition in a similar way to what you suggest, but for a different reason. The reformulation would be to say that we define the notion of signature by induction on the total number n of sort symbols, operator symbols, and equations.

If n = 0 we only have the empty signature.

If we have a signature Sigma of length n, then we can build a signature of length n+1 in one of three different ways. Etc. This is essentially what you suggest, isn't it?

The reason why we also discussed this is because induction-recursion is a proof-theoretically strong principle and it would pose a question concerning the strength of our metatheory (cosntructive set theory with some universes). Defining it by induction on n would make it clear that we do not need strong principles.

page 6 comment 1

The answer to your question is "yes". But this is again about the terminology signature, gat etc.

comment 2

I'm not following you here. What is happening here is that we are constructing an initial object in CwF_Sigma.

page 9 comment 1 (right column)

I agree that it may be confusing that the adjective "semantic" appears here, and that it would be better to remove it. The reason is that for the case of monoids we go through the official construction of a ("semantic") signature in the sense of Definition 4, whereas in the remaining examples we write the corresponding informal signatures with named variables.

comment 2 (left column)

I already referred to our discussion of "internal monoids" vs "monoids". We need to revisit this discussion again in view of your vote.

comment 3

Thanks for pointing out the wrong numbers of the definitions.

comment 4

You are right that we think that we have defined a notion of semantic signature of a gat, and that this is what we often call a "gat".

comment 5

Here you call (C, M_C) an instance of the theory of a single sort in a cwf. Why "theory"? I would call it a "model" of the gat Sigma_1 which has a single sort constant sort symbol.

page 10 comment 1

Thanks. Yes, this should be reformulated. Maybe "Sigma_6 is the resulting signature for (internal) monoids".

comment 2

Yes, please write about this separately.

page 11 comment 1

:-) .. maybe not.

comment 2

This is interesting. I wasn't aware that this aspect is already in your work. Where should I look?

comment 3

Yes.

page 12 comment 1

Yes, but again an example where the word "internal" should be there to be consistent with the rest.

page 14

Do you have something like this in your thesis? Where?

page 15

We should check this What are you not sure about
